## 1. Introduction

For a flight vehicle, the structure with force transfer paths is always designed by a series of optimization processes with objectives and constraints of structural mass [1–3], static strength [4–6], dynamic strength [6–10] and so on. The optimization should consider variables of different hierarchies such as the basic ones, i.e., structural topology and size. The topology to some extent indicates the presence or absence of structural constituents, while the size indicates the specific width, length, thickness or cross-sectional area of the constituent. In some researches, the structural shape which represents the location and the boundary of the structural constituent is assumed as an additional hierarchy between the topology and size ones [11]. The specific physical entity of the structural constituent is dependent on the structural type, e. g., the beam for beam-like structures. For a certain problem, additional hierarchy of variables will lead to a more complex optimization model, and meanwhile obtain better structures theoretically. Actually, the optimization efficiency is closely related with the variable decomposition of different hierarchies, as well as their interaction effect and optimization sequence.

The variable optimization of different hierarchies always proceeds in sequence of topology, shape and size. The topology optimization can be classified into continuous-type and discrete-type problems [11]. For continuous-type structures, the density-based homogenization [12] and SIMP optimization methods [13,14] coupling with finite element simulation are always adopted, where the structural constituent is represented by element and its presence or absence is determined by a density-like variable with values between 0 and 1. The distribution of such variables influences the structural properties like stiffness, mass and so on, and the optimal structure can be obtained by solving optimization problem with certain objectives and constraints. The optimization starts from a continuous domain and proceeds with deleting elements of small density-like values. Such method is mostly appropriate to structures without any prespecified force transfer paths, while for beam-like structures, its element deleting process will lead to unsmooth beam boundaries (gray densities between white and black [15]) and needs complex beam reconstructions. For discrete-type structures like truss or beam-like ones, the Ground Structure method [16–24] is widely adopted. In this method, the ground structure should be considered as the initial structure, certain trusses or beams should be specified firstly and will be partly removed during the optimization. The performance and efficiency of such optimization process are closely related with the scale of variable set, i.e., the optimal structure can only be obtained from the ground structure with sufficient number of beams, however, excessive beams will lead to high cost and low efficiency of optimizations. Under some circumstances, the beam presence and absence are determined by its size, i.e., smaller than a specified value reveals beam absence and vice versa, thus, the topology and size optimizations are always conducted simultaneously or sequentially and iteratively $[ 19 , 21$ , 22].

In general, the topology optimization determines the quantity or fraction of structural constituent, while the shape and size optimizations determine the final distribution and detail of the constituent. The optimal shape of structural constituents is obtained by changing coordinates of joints or nodes, while the optimal size is obtained by reducing or growing geometric dimensions (e.g., beam cross-section) considering the objectives and constraints, for instance, the structural strength is enhanced while meantime the mass is increased by the growing size. It should be noted that each topology has its corresponding optimal shape and size, thus for a certain structure the optimal shape and size should be obtained based on the optimal topology. However, it is difficult to obtain the matched optimal topology, shape and size by the sequential optimization, i.e., the topology hierarchy is also influenced by the shape and size hierarchy. Thus, the integrated optimization of different hierarchies has better efficiency theoretically [25]. For instances, an integrated optimization method based on the nonlinear programming algorithm is developed for a truss micro-lattice cantilever beam with composite plate in [26], and the three involved hierarchies are the material, shape and topology which include variables of the rod radius and fiber orientation of composites, the length and hole radius of boxes, the hole number of beams, respectively; an density-based integrated optimization method based on the globally convergent algorithm of moving asymptotes is proposed for additive manufactured structures in [27], and the two involved hierarchies are the topology and build direction which specifically indicate density and build angles, respectively; an integrated optimization method based on the moving asymptotes algorithm is developed for laminated composite shells in [28], and the involved three hierarchies are the material, fiber and layer which indicate material types, fiber angles and stacking sequences, respectively. In such methods, the key step is the decomposition of the variable into different hierarchies, and the above studies reveal that more hierarchies will bring about higher efficiency with more complex optimization models.

The beam-like structure is widely used in the wing or rudder of a flight vehicle. For a wing or rudder with certain configurations, the joints or nodes of beams are on certain boundaries, thus, the variable can be typically decomposed into topology and size hierarchies, and no shape hierarchy is involved. Under this condition, the change of topology, i.e., the presence or absence of beams also indicates variation of the beam distribution. In general, the beam topology is considered as a discrete variable with value of $\mathbf {\ddot {\rho}} 0 ^ {\prime \prime} \mathbf {\Lambda} _ {} 0 \mathbf {r \Lambda} ^ {\cdots 1 ^ {\prime \prime}}$ and the optimal beam distribution is obtained by removing beams with the ${} ^ {\mathrm{6}} {} ^ {\mathrm{6}}$ topology value from the ground structure, while the beam size is considered as a continuous variable with certain value range [21,23,24]. In such methods, especially for orthogonal-beam-like structures, the topology variable indicates the beam numbers actually, thus a large number of beams are needed in the ground structure and the optimization efficiency is relatively low. For radial-beam-like structures, the beam angle can be decomposed from the topology variable and creates a new hierarchy variable, thus, the required beam number of the ground structure can be reduced and the optimization efficiency can be improved theoretically.

The structural optimization is actually an update process of design variables based on the solving of mathematic models of the optimization problem. The solving method can be classified into the local optimization method like the linear programming [29], nonlinear programming [26,30] and moving asymptotes [27,31], and the global optimization method like the genetic algorithms [32,33], particle swarm algorithms [33,34], etc. Among these methods, the genetic algorithm and particle swarm algorithm are both inspired by behaviors of biological populations, and such heuristic search methods have better performance in searching global optimal results than those local ones. It was found that in general, the particle swarm algorithm has similar effectiveness while higher efficiency when handling continuous problems, however, the genetic algorithm performs greater effectiveness for problems involving discrete variables [33]. This can be indirectly understood from the origins of such two algorithms, $\mathrm{i.e.,}$ the particle swarm algorithm is inspired by the collective behavior in food-findings of birds which is inherently continuous (birds’ motion is continuous), while the genetic algorithm is inspired by the natural population evolution which is inherently discrete (some genes will be disappear). Thus, the genetic algorithm is adopted in this work for its potential to obtain better results than the local methods and better performance in handling discrete variables (beam topology), although relatively more searching steps and higher optimization cost are required.

In this work, a rudder structure with radial force transfer paths is considered. The optimization variable is firstly decomposed into two hierarchies of topology and size and a two-hierarchy optimization model is constructed. Then, an angle variable which is an implicit expression of beam direction is decomposed from the topology and creates a threehierarchy model of topology, angle and size. An integrated optimization method of multi-hierarchy variables is developed based on the genetic algorithm. The statics problem with objective of minimum structural mass and constraints of stress and displacement, and the static aeroelastic problem with objective of minimum influence quantity and constraints of mass, stress and displacement are solved, and the threehierarchy model show better results and higher efficiency.

## 2. The optimization problem with multi-hierarchy variables

## 2.1. Optimization problem

Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the ground structure of a radial-beam-like rudder and the potential optimal structure after optimizations, respectively. For the ground structure in Fig. 1(a), the beam has uniform size and distribution, while for the potential optimal structure in Fig. 1(b), the beam has nonuniform size and distribution, i.e., smaller size or sparse distribution of beams in low-load region while larger size or dense distribution of beams in high-load region. If the angles between two adjacent beams in the ground structure, low-load and high-load regions are indicated by α, β and $\gamma ,$ respectively, then specifically we can have: $\beta$ $> \alpha$ and $\gamma < \alpha$ . In traditional ground methods, the β-distribution is realized by removing beams in lower-load region, while the γ-distribution can only be obtained by a new ground structure with denser beams and higher optimization cost. However, if the angle is considered as an optimization variable directly, such γ-distribution with gathered beams will be easily realized by its variation. Thus, in this work, an optimization model with such additional angel variable is established.

## 2.2. General models

In traditional optimization process, the β-distribution is realized by removing beams in low-load regions. Two hierarchies of variables, $\mathrm{i.e.,}$ topology and size are involved in such optimization problem, and the mathematic model can be described as $\operatorname{Eq.}$ (1):

Find $X _ {T} , X _ {S}$

Min M(XT , XS)

$$\mathrm{S.T.} \quad g _ {i} ( X _ {T} , X _ {S} ) < g _ {i \mathrm{max}} \quad i = 1 , \cdots , d\tag{1}$$

$$X _ {T j} \in \{0 , 1 \} \quad j = 1 , \cdots , n$$

$$X _ {S j} \in \left[ L B _ {S j} , U B _ {S j} \right] \quad j = 1 , \cdots , n$$

(b) Potential optimal structure

where $X _ {T}$ and $X _ {S}$ are optimization variables, which indicate the topology and the size (cross-sectional width in this work) of beams, respectively; $M ( X _ {T} , X _ {S} )$ indicates the objective parameters such as the structural mass; $g _ {i} ( X _ {T} , X _ {S} )$ is the mechanical or thermal parameters like stress or temperature of the ith beam, and $g _ {\mathrm{imax}}$ indicates the available limits of such parameters; d is the number of beams of the present structure; $X _ {T j}$ is the topology of the jth beam with two values of 0 or 1 which represent the removing or remaining of the beam, respectively; $X _ {S j}$ is the size of the jth beam, and $L B _ {S j}$ and $U B _ {S j}$ represent the lower and upper bounds of $X _ {S j} ,$ respectively; n is the total beam number of the ground structure. The topology and size are variables of two different hierarchies, which are often optimized in sequence in traditional process [16], and such sequencing optimization loses sight of the size effect on the topology. Thus, some integrated optimization methods considering the mutual influence between variables of different hierarchies have been developed in the authors’ [35] and other researchers’ previous [21] works.

At present, the γ-distribution with gathered beams in high-load regions is still lack of effective method. In order to obtain optimal structures like Fig. 1(b) shown by the above optimization model, beams in the ground structure should be much more closely arranged, α should be smaller than γ and the optimization cost would be unaffordable (depends on $\gamma )$ . Thus, in this work, an implicit beam angle variable is decomposed from the optimization problem, a novel and more effective integrated optimization method is developed, and the mutual effects of topology, angle and size are considered. The general mathematic description of such optimization problem is shown in Eq. (2).

Find $X _ {T} , X _ {A} , X _ {S}$

$$\begin{array} {l} {\mathrm{Min~} \ M ( X _ {T} , X _ {A} , X _ {S} )} \\ {\mathrm{S.T.} \quad g _ {i} ( X _ {T} , X _ {A} , X _ {S} ) < g _ {i \mathrm{max}} \quad i = 1 , \cdots , d} \\ {\quad X _ {T j} \in \{0 , 1 \} \quad j = 1 , \cdots , n} \\ {\quad X _ {A j} \in \left[ L B _ {A j} , U B _ {A j} \right] \quad j = 1 , \cdots , n} \\ {\quad X _ {S j} \in \left[ L B _ {S j} , U B _ {S j} \right] \quad j = 1 , \cdots , n} \end{array}\tag{2}$$

where $X _ {A}$ is the newly added optimization variable, i.e., the angle variable of beams and its geometric specification will be described in Section $3 ; X _ {A j}$ is the angle variable of the jth beam; $L B _ {A j}$ and $U B _ {A j}$ represent the lower and upper bounds of $X _ {A j} ,$ respectively.

## 3. The multi-hierarchy integrated optimization algorithm

The beam topology, angle and size are variables of different hierarchies. The integrated optimization method has advantages of considering mutual effects among variables of different hierarchies, and has potentials of greater feasible zone and more favorable results. In this work, the genetic algorithm is adopted and improved to solve the above optimization problem.

## 3.1. Unified chromosome encoding with gray code

In this work, three types of chromosomes, i.e., topology, angle and

size are involved as shown in $\operatorname{Eq.} \left( 3 \right)$

$$\begin{array} {r l} & {X _ {T 1} , X _ {T 2} , \cdots , X _ {T n} | X _ {A 1} , X _ {A 2} , \cdots , X _ {A n} | X _ {S 1} , X _ {S 2} , \cdots , X _ {S n}} \\ & {X _ {T i} \in \{0 , 1 \} , X _ {A i} = \{b _ {i 1} , b _ {i 2} , \cdots , b _ {i n} \} , X _ {S i} = \{c _ {i 1} , c _ {i 2} , \cdots , c _ {i m} \}} \\ & {b _ {i j} \in \{0 , 1 \} , i = 1 , 2 , \cdots n , j = 1 , 2 , \cdots m} \\ & {c _ {i j} \in \{0 , 1 \} , i = 1 , 2 , \cdots n , j = 1 , 2 , \cdots m} \end{array}\tag{3}$$

where $b _ {i j}$ and $c _ {i j}$ are the Gray codes of beam angle and size variables, respectively; m is the code width. From Eq. (3) one can find that the topology variable is represented by 0 or 1 which indicate the removing and remaining of beams, respectively; while the angle and size variables are represented by a binary code string consists of 0 and 1, and the real values should be obtained by decoding process. It should be noted that for the angle and size variables, a special binary code, i.e., the Gray code is adopted to eliminate the Hamming cliffs of natural binary code. The unified encoding scheme of discrete (topology) and continuous (angle and size) variables improves the efficiency of genetic operators as discussed below.

## 3.2. Selection, crossover and mutation operators

The genetic algorithm is developed and derived from the natural evolution, thus genetic algorithms contain three basic operators, $\mathrm{i.e.,}$ the selection, crossover and mutation which represent the survival of the fittest, mating between selected individuals and random modification in the natural evolution, respectively [36]. According to the biology-based understanding, one can find that the crossover process involves the gene exchange between different individuals. In this work, each individual has three types of genes of topology, angle and size and the mismatched exchange should be avoided, thus three independent crossover processes should be specified.

The selection process is to find better individuals with higher fitness and form new populations to conduct subsequent crossover and mutation processes. In this work, for the selection operator, the widely used stochastic universal sampling [37] method is adopted for its advantages in the selection of relatively inferior individuals and the higher efficiency over its original scheme, $\mathrm{i.e.,}$ , the well-known roulette wheel selection [38]. In general, the probability of being selected for each individual has positive correlation with its fitness.

The crossover process is to create offspring and build the next generation of the selected population. In the crossover process, the genes (values of binary string) of two individuals will be exchanged up to a certain crossover point which is specified in the binary string randomly. Such process is the crucial step of genetic algorithms on account of the possible creation of new better individuals. There are several types of crossover operators like one-point, multi-point and uniform ones. In this work, the three variables of different hierarchy should have independent and non-interfering crossover process as shown in Fig. 2, in which the one-point crossover operator is adopted for each variable. In this process, all data in the right side of the crossover point is exchanged between the two parent strings, the data in the left side is remained and two child strings are then created. In this work, the crossover rate is assumed to be 0.8.

The mutation process is to create new individuals by inverting gene values (the inversion is between 0 and 1 for the binary code) of selected individuals with low probability. In this work, the Simple mutation method as shown in Fig. 3 is adopted and the mutation probability of each bit element is 0.7 divided by the chromosome length.

## 3.3. Fitness function

As discussed above, the selection is operated according to the fitness of individuals. An individual with higher fitness owns higher probability to be selected to create offspring, and its genes and characteristics of “fit” have more opportunities to be inherited by offspring. The fitness is described by $\operatorname{Eq.}$ (4):

$$F ( Z _ {i} ) = 2 - S P + 2 ( S P - 1 ) \frac {Z _ {i} - 1} {N - 1}\tag{4}$$

where Zi is the position number of the ith individual in the population which is ordered according to the objective function value; SP is the selective pressure which indicates the bias towards the most fit individuals, and it often has values between 1.1 to 2; and N is the number of individuals in the population. It is clear that the fitness is closely related with the objective function value of individuals and Eq. (4) is actually the transformation relation between them. Due to the possible negative value of fitness that caused by minimization problem and the various constraints as shown in Eqs. (1) and (2), certain transformations of objective function are necessary. In this work, an augmented objective function contains a penalty term is adopted as shown in Eq. (5):

$$\begin{array} {l l} {\displaystyle M _ {r} \big ( X _ {T} , X _ {a} , X _ {S} , r _ {p} \big ) = M ( X _ {T} , X _ {a} , X _ {S} ) + r _ {p} \cdot f ( g _ {i} ) \cdot \sum _ {i = 1} ^ {d} {g _ {i}} ^ {2}} \\ {\displaystyle g _ {i} = g _ {i} ( X _ {T} , X _ {a} , X _ {S} ) = g _ {i \mathrm{max}} - [ g ] _ {i}} \\ {\displaystyle f ( g _ {i} ) = \left\{\begin{array} {l l} {0 , \ g _ {i} ( X _ {T} , X _ {a} , X _ {S} ) \le 0} \\ {1 , \ g _ {i} ( X _ {T} , X _ {a} , X _ {S} ) > 0} \end{array} \right.} \end{array}\tag{5}$$

where Mr is the new objective function, and r is the penalty multiplier; the second term of the right side is the penalty function that created by the exterior penalty function method for inequality constraints.

## 4. The optimization and numerical models

## 4.1. The optimization model and the implicit angle variable

In this work, the statics and static aeroelastic problems are considered, and the minimum structural mass and static aeroelastic property are adopted as objective functions, respectively. The specific mathematic descriptions of such two optimization models are shown in Eqs. (6) and (7), respectively.

Find $X _ {T} , X _ {A} , X _ {S}$

(6)

$$\begin{array} {r l} & {\mathrm{Sur~} \mathbb {K} [ \mathcal {K} , \mathcal {K} , \mathcal {K} , \mathcal {K} ] = \sum _ {j \in \mathcal {N} _ {j}} ^ {\infty} \mathcal {K} \mathcal {K} \mathcal {K} , \mathcal {K} \mathcal {K} ,} \\ & {\leq \sum _ {j \in \mathcal {N} _ {j}} ^ {\infty} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j}} \\ & {\leq \sum _ {j \in \mathcal {N} _ {j}} ^ {\infty} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j}} \\ & {\leq \mathbb {E} _ {j , j} ^ {\infty} \left( \mathbb {E} _ {j , j} ^ {\infty} \right) ^ {2} = \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{E} _ {j , j}} \\ & {\mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j}} \\ & {\leq \left( \mathbb {E} _ {j , j} ^ {\infty} \right) ^ {2} = \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{E} _ {j , j}} \\ & {\mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} - 1 - \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{E} _ {j , j} ^ {\infty}} \\ & {\qquad \quad + \mathrm{i} - \mathrm{i} \frac {\partial} {\partial x} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j}} \\ & \qquad \quad + \mathrm{i} \frac {\partial} {\partial x} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ {j , j} \mathcal {K} _ j \end{array}\tag{7}$$

where mi, σi and ui are the structural mass, stress and displacement of the ith beam, respectively; $\Delta C _ {y} ^ {\delta} , C _ {y} ^ {\delta} r i g i d a n d C _ {y} ^ {\delta}$ are the aeroelastic influence quantity, lift curve slope over rudder attack angle δ with rigid and elastic structures, respectively; $\sigma _ {\mathrm{imax}}$ is the maximum allowable stress of the ith beam; $u _ {\mathrm{max}}$ is the maximum allowable displacement of the structure; g1 indicates the constraint of rudder structural mass and $m _ {s}$ is the maximum allowable value (in the static aeroelastic problem). From Eqs. (6) and (7), one can find that: for the statics problem, the objective function is the minimization of the rudder structural mass, and the constraints are the structural stress and displacement; for the static aeroelastic problem, the objective function is the minimization of the aeroelastic influence quantity, i.e., the relative reduction of lift curve slope, and the constraints are the structural mass, stress and displacement.

In order to obtain better optimization efficiency, an angle variable is decomposed to describe the angle deviation between the beams in the ground and optimized structures. The variable is given as an implicit expression of beam direction, and it is not a variable that can be intuitively understood. The derivation of such angle variable, $X _ {A j}$ is shown in Eq. (8) and some variables that involved in the derivation are shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4, the solid and dashed lines indicate beams in the ground and optimized structures, respectively. It can be found that the angle between two adjacent beams in the ground structure is indicated by α, the angle between the jth beam in the ground structure and that in the optimized structure is $X _ {A j} ^ {\phantom {'}}$ , the angle between the jth beam and the horizontal line is represented by $A _ {j} ^ {'} ,$ then the derivation of $X _ {A j}$ and its constraint range can be described as Eq. (8).

$$\begin{array} {r l} & {X _ {A j} ^ {'} \in \left[ - \ b 0.5 {\cdot} \alpha + \alpha ^ {0} , \ 0.5 {\cdot} \alpha - \alpha ^ {0} \right]} \\ & {A _ {j} ^ {'} = X _ {A j} ^ {'} + \alpha {\cdot} j , A _ {j} ^ {'} \in \left[ \alpha {\cdot} j - 0.5 {\cdot} \alpha + \alpha ^ {0} , \ \alpha {\cdot} j + 0.5 {\cdot} \alpha - \alpha ^ {0} \right]} \\ & {X _ {A j} = X _ {A j} ^ {'} + 0.5 {\cdot} \alpha , X _ {A j} \in \left[ \alpha ^ {0} , \ \alpha - \alpha ^ {0} \right]} \end{array}\tag{8}$$

where $\alpha ^ {0}$ is a small value of about $0.5 ^{\circ}$ to avoid the overlap of two adjacent beams. In the optimization process, $A _ {j} ^ {'}$ is not considered as the optimization variable since α and j will increase the chromosome length and the complexity of chromosome encoding and influence the subsequent genetic operations; and the transformation from $X _ {A j}$ ′to $X _ {A j}$ is to guarantee positive values for the optimization variables.

In this work, $\sigma _ {i \operatorname* {m a x}} , u _ {\operatorname* {m a x}}$ and m are assumed to be 225 MPa, $^ {27}$ mm (5 % of the rudder span length) and 1.3 kg, respectively; α is assumed to be $_ {15 ^{\circ}}$ , thus $L B _ {A j}$ and $U B _ {A j}$ are $0.5 ^{\circ}$ and 14.5◦, respectively; $L B _ {S j}$ and $U B _ {S j}$ are assumed to be 0.5 mm and 10 mm, respectively.

## 4.2. The numerical model

In the optimization process, the objective function value of each individual is obtained by certain numerical calculations. In this work, for the structural mass and static aeroelastic performance optimization cases, the statics and static aeroelastic problems are respectively calculated by numerical simulations.

## (a) Statics problem

The governing equation of the statics problem is shown in Eq. (9).

$${\begin{array} {r l} & {{\frac {\partial \sigma _ {x x}} {\partial x}} + {\frac {\partial \sigma _ {x x}} {\partial y}} + {\frac {\partial \sigma _ {x x}} {\partial z}} + f _ {x} = 0} \\ & {{\frac {\partial \sigma _ {x y}} {\partial x}} + {\frac {\partial \sigma _ {y y}} {\partial y}} + {\frac {\partial \tau _ {x y}} {\partial z}} + f _ {y} = 0} \\ & {{\frac {\partial \tau _ {x z}} {\partial x}} + {\frac {\partial \tau _ {x z}} {\partial y}} + {\frac {\partial \sigma _ {z z}} {\partial z}} + f _ {z} = 0} \\ & {\varepsilon _ {x x} = {\frac {\partial u} {\partial x}} ; \varepsilon _ {y y} = {\frac {\partial \nu} {\partial y}} ; \varepsilon _ {z z} = {\frac {\partial w} {\partial z}}} \\ & {\gamma _ {x y} = {\frac {\partial u} {\partial y}} + {\frac {\partial \nu} {\partial x}} ; \gamma _ {x z} = {\frac {\partial \nu} {\partial z}} + {\frac {\partial w} {\partial y}} ; \gamma _ {x z} = {\frac {\partial u} {\partial z}} + {\frac {\partial w} {\partial x}}} \end{array}}\tag{9}$$

where $f _ {x} , f _ {y}$ and $f _ {z}$ are components of unit body force in x,yand $z {\mathrm{~di}}$ rections, respectively; $\sigma _ {x x} , \sigma _ {y y}$ and $\sigma _ {z z}$ are the normal stresses in x,yand z directions, respectively; $\tau _ {x y \cdots} \tau _ {y z}$ zare the shear stresses; $\varepsilon _ {x x} , \varepsilon _ {y y}$ andεzzare the strains in x,yand z directions, respectively; $\gamma _ {x y} . . . \gamma _ {y z}$ are the shear strains; and $u , \nu$ and ware displacements in x,yand z directions, respectively.

Fig. 5 shows geometric and meshed models of the ground structure. As indicated by the arrows in Fig. 5(a), the whole structure contains the skin, the beams (numbered as 1 to 12) and the rudder axle. The thickness of skin is assumed to be 1 mm, the initial angle between the two adjacent beams is assumed to be $_ {15 ^{\circ}}$ and thus 12 beams are included in the ground structure. The initial beam size, i.e., width is 10 mm and the total beam mass (the skin and rudder axle are excluded) of the ground structure is 3.79 kg. Fig. 5(b) and (c) show the meshed model and that without skin, respectively. In this work, the numerical simulations are conducted in the commercial software NASTRAN, the shell elements CTRIA3 and CQUAD4 are used to discrete the skin and beams, respectively, and the solid element CTETRA is used to discrete the rudder axle. In the meshed model, the element number of CTRIA3, CQUAD4 and CTETRA are 15,468, 1460 and 1905, respectively; the total node and element numbers are 9139 and 18,833, respectively, and the mesh independence is obtained. It should be noted that during the optimization process, the number of element and node will change with the variation of beams’ distribution. The 2024 Al with density of 2800 ${\bf k g} / {\bf m} ^ {3} ;$ , elastic modulus of 73.1 GPa and Poisson ratio of 0.324 is adopted as the material.

For the statics problem, the aerodynamic pressure should be obtained as the boundary condition. It is obtained by a CFD simulation, the Mach number is $^ {4 ,}$ the flight altitude is 20 km and the attack angle is 10◦ Fig. 6(a) and (b) show the meshed model and pressure fields of CFD simulation, respectively. The meshed model has 569,396 elements and 218,838 nodes in total. From Fig. 6(b), one can find that the windward surface has much larger pressure than the leeward one. The pressure shown in Fig. 6(b) is used as the boundary condition in the statics simulation, and the triangle aera weighting method is adopted to transfer the pressure to corresponding structural nodes.

After the simulation of each individual, the structural stress and displacement are extracted and verified by the constraint values, and the overall mass is obtained and used as the objective function value.

## (b) Static aeroelastic problem

In the static aeroelastic simulation of this work, the aerodynamic force is obtained by the panel method with ZONA51 theory to save computational cost. Fig. 7 shows the lifting surface with 2400 elements and the grid independence is obtained. In the aeroelastic simulation, the same geometric and meshed models that shown in Fig. 5 are adopted as the structural model. The thin plate spline interpolation method is adopted to transfer information between structural and aerodynamic grids. In this work, the flight Mach number is 4, the flight altitude is 20 km and the attack angle is 10◦

The relationship between aerodynamic pressure coefficients and downwash is shown in Eq. (10):

$$\{W \} = [ D ] \{C _ {p} \}\tag{10}$$

where {W} is the downwash and related with the attack angle and structural displacement; [D] is the aerodynamic influence coefficient matrix and dependent on the specified Mach number; and $\{C _ {p} \}$ is the aerodynamic pressure coefficient. After the solving of Eq. (10), the aerodynamic coefficients, lift curve slope and other parameters can then be obtained.

After the simulation of each individual, the structural stress, displacement and overall mass are extracted and verified by the constraint ranges, and the aeroelastic influence quantity, $\mathrm{i.e.,}$ the reduction rate of the lift curve slope over attack angle is obtained and used as the objective function value.

(c) Meshed structure with hidden skin

(a) Mesh of aerodynamic model

(b) Pressure fields

## 4.3. The optimization path

Fig. 8 shows the optimization path of this work. Three steps are involved: 1st, the initialization of population in which an initial population with certain number of individuals is generated based on the encoding of the ground structure and subsequent random assignment of code strings (random “0″ or “1″); 2nd, the generation of new population including the selection of individuals according to fitness, the crossover and mutation operation of the topology, angle and size variables; 3rd, the output of optimized structure including the construction of new structures by decoding operation, the numerical analysis of certain problems (statics, static aeroelastic problems) and the judgment of convergence. Also, the numerical results obtained in the 3rd step will be used to calculate the fitness of each individual.

The genetic optimization algorithm usually has two types of convergence judgments: the generation number and the variation line of objection function. For the first one, the optimization will be terminated when the generation number is larger than the specified value; the value is dependent on the previous analysis and should be specified before the optimization proceedings. For the second one, the optimization will be stopped when the variation of objective function value during the past several generations is smaller than a specified value. In this work, the generation number is adopted as the convergence judgment since the effectiveness of different-hierarchy models should be compared with the same cost. The specific judgment number is determined in consideration of the objective function line to some extent, i.e., it should ensure the very gentle variation in the last optimization process for both three- and two- hierarchy models. This can also be validated by the objective function lines in Section 5.

## 5. Results and discussions

## 5.1. Statics problem

Fig. 9 is the optimization process from 0 to 100 generations in which the line shows the minimum structural mass (the skin and rudder axle mass are excluded) for each generation (optimization objective). In the optimization process, 25 individuals for each generation and 100 generations in total are specified. The stress and displacement constraints are assumed to be 225 MPa and 27 mm, respectively. As discussed in subSection 3.3, the population of the initial generation (generation 0 in the curve) is created by a random process, thus results with dissatisfied constraints might be obtained for the first several generations. In this work, such type of unqualified results appears for the first 3 generations as shown in Fig. 9, and after the 4th generation, all results shown in the curve meet the constraints and can be considered as qualified results. As shown in Fig. 9, the mass decreases with the proceeding of optimization process and three stages are involved since the first qualified structure obtained at the 4th generation: a rapid reduction from 1.78 to 1.06 kg with the generation proceeds from 4 to 22, a slow reduction from 1.03 to 0.96 kg with the generation increases from 23 to 57, and a gradual reduction from 0.94 to 0.87 kg with the generation increases from 58 to 100. In general, the optimization process has decreasing optimization efficiency: rapid progressions at the initial stage, gradual progressions at subsequent stages and several sudden progressions occasionally. It also should be noted that, the mass reductions of the final optimal structure are 77.0 % and 51.1 % comparing with the ground structure and the first qualified structure, respectively.

Fig. 10(a), (b), (c) and (d) show the distribution of beams (left figures), displacement (middle figures) and stress (right figures) for structures of 4th, 22nd, 57st and 100th generations, respectively. In the left figures (beam distribution), the red solid and black dashed lines show the beam locations in the optimized structure and in the ground structure, respectively, and the mismatch between them indicates the angle variable. One can find from the beam distributions that No. 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7 beams are abandoned from the 4th generation, No. 12 beam is abandoned in the 4th generation while appears after the 22nd generation, and the angle of the reserved beams varies with the optimization proceeding. From the middle and right figures, one can find that the largest displacement and stress appear at the rudder tip and regions near the rudder axel, respectively, and both are smaller than the constraint values (27 mm and 225 MPa).

Fig. 11 shows the specific values of angle (upper part) and size (lower part) for each beam and the black, red, blue and green columns show the results of 4th, 22nd, 57th, and 100th generations, respectively. From Fig. 11, one can find that: the 4th generation has 6 beams with much larger size while the 22nd, 57th and 100th generations have 7 beams (additional No. 12) with smaller size; the size of most beams decreases with the optimization proceeding which reveals the reduction of structural mass; and the potential loss of load-bearing capacity is compensated by the variation rather the monotonical increase or decrease of beam angles as shown in the upper part of the figure.

## 5.2. Static aeroelastic problem

Fig. 12 is the optimization process of static aeroelastic problem in which the black curve indicates the variation of aeroelastic influence quantity (objective function) along with the generation, while the blue curve shows that of structural mass (constrained to be smaller than 4 kg). In the optimization process, 25 individuals for each generation and 100 generations in total are specified. The mass, stress and displacement constraints are assumed to be 1.3 kg, 225 MPa and 27 mm, respectively. In this work, all the results including the initial generation (generation 0 in the curve) which is randomly generated from the ground structure meet the constraints and can be considered as qualified results. As shown in Fig. 12, the aeroelastic influence quantity decreases with the proceeding of optimization process from the 1st generation and three stages are involved since the 1st generation: a rapid reduction from 8.83 % to 6.00 % with the generation proceeds from 1 to 29, a small increase and subsequent slow reduction from 6.10 % to 5.52 % with the generation increases from 30 to 55, and a gradual reduction from 5.52 % to 5.48 % with the generation increases from 55 to 100. In general, similar to that shown in Fig. 9, the optimization process has rapid and gradual progressions at the initial and subsequent stages, respectively, and several sudden progressions occasionally. It also should be noted that, the aeroelastic influence quantity of the final optimal structure is 37.9 % smaller than the first structure. Qualitatively, large structural mass will result into high structural stiffness and small aeroelastic influence quantity, thus as shown in the blue curve, the structural mass approaches its upper limit with the increase of generation.

Fig. 13(a), (b), (c) and (d) show the distribution of beams, displacement and stress for structures of 1st, 29th, 55th and 100th generations, respectively. In the left figures (beam distribution), the red solid and black dashed lines show the beam locations in the optimized structure and in the ground structure, respectively. As shown in the left figures, beams of No. 2, 5, 8, 9 and 10, No. 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7, No. 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7, No. 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7 are abandoned for the 1st, 29th, 55th and 100th generations, respectively. The angle of the reserved beams varies with the optimization proceeding to obtain greater stiffness. From the middle and right figures, one can find that the largest displacement and stress appear at the rudder tip and region near the rudder axel, respectively, and both are smaller than the constraint values (27 mm and 225 MPa).

Fig. 14 shows the specific values of angle (upper part) and size (lower part) for each beam and the black, red, blue and green columns show the results of 1st, 29th, 55th, and 100th generations, respectively. From Fig. 14, one can find that the beam angle varies along with the optimization proceeding, and the variation rather than the monotonically decrease (as shown in Fig. 11) of beam size can also be observed. From

Figs. 13 and 14, one can find that for beams of No. 10 to 12, the higher displacement which reveals higher load-bearing capacity requirement leads to larger size for these beams.

## 5.3. Comparison with two-hierarchy optimization

In order to verify the advantages of the three-hierarchy (topology, angle and size) optimization model, the two-hierarchy (topology and size) optimization which has a ground structure of 18 beams is conducted. The two models have the same number of variables (12 × 3 for three- hierarchy one, $18 \times 2$ for two-hierarchy one).

Fig. 15 shows the optimization process of statics problem. In the figure, the black solid, black dashed, and blue solid curves indicate the process of two-hierarchy optimization, process of three-hierarchy optimization, and their relative deviation (the mass reduction divided by the two-hierarchy mass), respectively, and the column chart in the right upper part shows the size of each beam for the 1st, 12th, 72nd and 100th generations. From Fig. 15, one can find that: for the two-hierarchy curve, the structural mass decreases from 2.03 to 1.13 kg rapidly with the generation increases from 1 to 12, then it decreases slowly to 0.96 kg when the generation increases to 72, and after that it has rare change until the generation increases to 100 and even 150; the structures of 1st, 12th, 72nd and 100th generations have 12, 10, 9 and 9 beams, respectively; for the three-hierarchy curve, it has structural mass of 0.87 kg and 0.77 kg with mass reductions of 8.4 % and 18.9 % compared with the two-hierarchy curve at the 100th and 150th generations, respectively, which means that the three-hierarchy optimization method has higher efficiency than the two-hierarchy one; more specifically, if the blue curve is noticed one can find that the three-hierarchy method will have positive effect (positive value of blue curve) and growing advantages (increasing trend of blue curve) after the 23rd generation.

Fig. 16 shows the optimization process of static aeroelasitc problem. In the figure, the black solid, black dashed, and blue solid curves indicate the process of two-hierarchy optimization, process of threehierarchy optimization, and their relative deviation (the aeroelastic influence quantity reduction divided by the two-hierarchy value), respectively, and the column chart shows the size of each beam for 1st, 46th, and 100th generations. From Fig. 16, one can find that: for the two-hierarchy curve, the aeroelastic influence quantity decreases from 7.31 % to 5.76 % with the generation increases from 1 to 46, after that very limited variations of such value can be observed until the generation increases to 100 with the value of 5.73 %; the structures of 1st, 46th, and 100th generations have 10, 7 and 7 beams, respectively; for the three-hierarchy curve, it has quantity of 5.48 % with reduction of 4.3 % compared with the two-hierarchy curve at the 100th generation, which means that the three-hierarchy optimization method has higher efficiency than the two-hierarchy one; if the two curves are compared and the blue curve is noticed more specifically, one can find that the threehierarchy curve will have positive effect (positive value of blue curve) and growing advantages (increasing trend of blue curve) after the 46th generation.

In summary, comparing with the two-hierarchy optimization model, the three-hierarchy one will have positive effect and growing advantages after the evolution of certain generations (23rd and 46th generations for the statics and static aeroelastic problems in this work).

## 6. Conclusions

In this work, an integrated optimization method of multi-hierarchy variables for rudder structures with radial force transfer paths is developed. The optimization variable of a rudder with radial beams is decomposed into two hierarchies of topology and size, three hierarchies of topology, size and angle, and a two-hierarchy and a three-hierarchy optimization model are then constructed, respectively. The integrated optimization method of multi-hierarchy variables is developed based on the genetic algorithm. The statics problem with objective of minimum structural mass and constraints of stress and displacement, and the static aeroelastic problem with objective of minimum influence quantity and constraints of mass, stress and displacement are solved, and the results show some conclusions as follows.

(1) In general, the integrated multi-hierarchy optimization process has rapid progressions at the initial stage, gradual progressions at subsequent stages and several sudden progressions occasionally.

(2) For the statics problem solved by the three-hierarchy optimization method, the mass reductions of the optimal structure comparing with the ground and the first qualified one are 77.0 % and 51.1 %, respectively.

(3) For the static aeroelastic problem solved by the three-hierarchy optimization method, the aeroelastic influence quantity of the optimal structure is reduced by 37.9 %.

(4) Comparing with the two-hierarchy model, the three-hierarchy one will have positive effect and growing advantages after the evolution of certain generations.

(5) The three-hierarchy optimization is more efficient than the twohierarchy one with structural mass reduction of 18.9 % for the statics problem and aeroelastic influence quantity reduction of 4.3 % for the static aeroelastic problem.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jian-Jun Gou: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Shu-Zhen Jia: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Software, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Hai-Tao Tian: Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Jia-Xin Hu: Software, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization. Chun-Lin Gong: Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
